---
layout: post
title:  "pyhome"
date:   2016-02-10 21:39:00 +0100
tags: [git, System Administration, Python]
summary: Easing the pain of synchronising your awesome shell configuration
         across multiple systems with version control.
---

As someone who uses the terminal through most of the working day and for the
majority of tasks, I like to use a customised shell environment and editor
program. However, switching between machines - be they my office workstation,
laptop, web servers I maintain or compute clusters I use for running
simulations - inevitably ends up with the hassle of juggling a variety of
configuration files between systems and updating them all with each change to
my setup.

Sounds like a job for version control.

## The Task at Hand

Dotfiles are simple text files in your home directory that store commands or
settings for the shell and other programs, so called because their names begin
with a `.`, rendering them hidden by default in the shell and in other
programs. In my case, I have a set of configuration files for the bash and zsh
shells, the latter of which I use mainly, and a set of config files and
packages for vim, my primary text editor.

Storing these in a repository then poses a wee bit of a problem. As these files
are often located directly in your home directory, they cannot so readily be
stored in a typical version control repository. Fortunately, the excellent tool
[homesick] by Josh Nichols provides an easy and convenient way to maintain your
dotfiles in a reposiory and then automatically generate symbolic links to them
from the appropriate location in your home directory.

Unfortunately, none of the systems I use come with Ruby, the language
[homesick] is based on, preinstalled, and installing Ruby on compute clusters
with archaic packages, even with the excellent [RVM] tool, quickly became as
much of a hassle as the tool was meant to avoid.

## pyhome

As a self-diagnosed Python junkie, I waited until a spare minute and wrote my
own homesick equivalent, pyhome. Following the same repository structure as
homesick, pyhome replicates its basic functions:

* `pyhome clone` - clone a new dotfile git repository to the right location
* `pyhome pull` - update a dotfile git repository and its submodules
* `pyhome list` - list existing repositories in the pyhome folder
* `pyhome link` - generate symbolic links in the home folder for a repo
* `pyhome unlink` - remove symbolic links for a repo
* `pyhome remove` - remove a repo and its links

Conflicts between existing dotfiles and links in the home folder are reported,
and the user is prompted to choose an action, preventing accidentally wiping
existing configurations.

pyhome is written to ensure backwards compatability with reasonably modern
versions of both Python 2 and 3, and without dependencies outside the standard
library, making sure that it runs smoothly out of the box with the preinstalled
system Python on any of the systems that I use.

## Installation

pyhome is available on the [Python Package Index (PyPI)][pyhome-pypi], and so
can be easily installed with `pip`, the Python package manager:

{% highlight bash %}
pip install pyhome
{% endhighlight %}

You can also get the latest version of pyhome from its
[GitHub page][pyhome-github]. Comments, suggestions and contributions are
welcome!

[homesick]: https://github.com/technicalpickles/homesick
[RVM]: https://rvm.io/
[pyhome-pypi]: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pyhome
[pyhome-github]: https://github.com/acroz/pyhome
