---
layout: post
title:  "asyncio"
date:   2019-02-25 21:36:00 +0000
tags: [Python, asyncio]
---

At [Faculty][Faculty], we build a lot of our platform's backend services in
[Scala][Scala]. It's a really nice programming language to work with, and I've
found the functional programming model and strong typing really effective in
writing well tested, robust software, however when it came to writing a
lightweight agent for our new jobs feature, we decided that the computational
resource demands of running the JVM was too costly.

We decided instead to leverage the experience of the team in writing modern
Python code, taking advantage of some of the new functionality added to recent
versions, in particular asynchronous programming with coroutines and type
hinting.

In this post I'll share some of our experience in developing asynchronous code
in Python with [asyncio][asyncio].

## Coroutines and event loops

Before diving into some code examples, I'd like to explain a little about how
asynchronous programming with coroutines works.

Coroutines are a kind of concurrent programming that works collaboratively.
Each coroutine is a line of execution that can suspend its control of the
program to allow another coroutine to run. This is particularly useful when a
coroutine is waiting for something like a network request to complete - in this
case execution of that coroutine cannot continue, but other useful work could
be done by other coroutines.

Implementation of a coroutine programming system requires some way of code
releasing control of the program and being resumed at a later time (we will
cover the syntax for this in Python below), but also requires a system for
managing the execution of active coroutines. This is typically achieved with an
event loop. The event loop keeps track of active coroutines, and when one
releases control, the event loop will pass control to another.

It's useful to have basic familiarity with these concepts as it helps to
understand the syntax and purpose of the libraries we're dealing with. I'll
refer to event loops and coroutines extensively through the post.

## Writing coroutines in Python

Python 3.5 introduced the async/await syntax to the language. These keywords
allow you to declare coroutines and use them. For example, use `async def` to
declare a coroutine:

```python
async def example():
    print("Example is running")
```

The above allows you to declare a coroutine, but to run it, it needs to be
explicitly run on an event loop. Calling it will return a `coroutine` object
which is not actually running:

```python
>>> example()
<coroutine object example at 0x10b2bb4c0>
```

You're free to use whichever event loop implementation you like, however the
standard library provides [asyncio][asyncio], a popular choice that a lot of
third party tools like [aiohttp][aiohttp] have been built on top of. To run our
coroutine with asyncio, get an event loop and pass it the `coroutine` object we
got above:

```python
>>> import asyncio
>>> loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
>>> loop.run_until_complete(example())
Example is running
>>> loop.close()
```

**Note:** Python 3.7 added `asyncio.run()`, which creates an event loop and
runs a coroutine on it for you. In thise case the above example becomes simply
`asyncio.run(example())`. In the rest of the example I'll use `asyncio.run()`,
assuming Python 3.7 or later, but you can adapt the code to create a loop and
call its `run_until_complete()` method if using older Python versions.

## Giving up control

We've covered writing basic coroutines, however as mentioned earlier they're
only really useful when they yield control of the event loop so other
coroutines can do some work. To do this, you `await` another coroutine (or
[other awaitable objects][asyncio-awaitable] provided by asyncio):

```python
async def inner():
    print("inner coroutine")

async def example():
    await inner()
```

In this example, at the point where we `await` the inner coroutine, control of
the event loop is given up, allowing other coroutines on the loop to be
executed instead.

If the called coroutine returns something on completion, the `await` statement
will return it when the coroutine completes. In the following example, we bind
the result of `get_message` and print it:

```python
>>> async def get_message():
>>>     return "Coroutines are great"
>>>
>>> async def example():
>>>     message = await get_message()
>>>     print(message)
>>>
>>> asyncio.run(example())
Coroutines are great
```

## A more complete example

Haviong coroutines yield control of the event loop is most useful when it's
anticipated that we're going to have to wait idle for a while until some useful
work can be done. We can emulate this case with `asyncio.sleep`, which simply
waits for a specified number of seconds before completing:

```python
import asyncio

async def print_after(message, delay):
    """Print a message after the specified delay (in seconds)"""
    await asyncio.sleep(delay)
    print(message)

async def main():
    # Use asyncio.gather to run two coroutines concurrently:
    await asyncio.gather(
        print_after("world!", 2),
        print_after("Hello", 1)
    )

asyncio.run(main())
```

Running this example prints out:

```
Hello
world!
```

### When do coroutines start running?

A common pitfall when using coroutines with asyncio is that they sometimes need
to be scheduled on the event loop explicitly. Consider the following example,
where I've attempted to reproduce the same behaviour as when using
`asyncio.gather` above:

```python
import asyncio

async def print_after(message, delay):
    """Print a message after the specified delay (in seconds)"""
    await asyncio.sleep(delay)
    print(message)

async def main():
    # Start coroutine twice (hopefully they start!)
    first_awaitable = print_after("world!", 2)
    second_awaitable = print_after("Hello", 1)
    # Wait for coroutines to finish
    await first_awaitable
    await second_awaitable

asyncio.run(main())
```

However, when running this, I get the following output, despite expecting
"Hello" to get printed first after its shorter delay:

```
world!
Hello
```

The reason for this becomes clearer after adapting the example to instead print
at the start and end of the coroutine's execution:

```python
import asyncio

async def example(message):
    print("start of example():", message)
    await asyncio.sleep(1)
    print("end of example():", message)

async def main():
    # Start coroutine twice (hopefully they start!)
    first_awaitable = example("First call")
    second_awaitable = example("Second call")
    # Wait for coroutines to finish
    await first_awaitable
    await second_awaitable

asyncio.run(main())
```

Running the above results in the following output:

```
start of example(): First call
end of example(): First call
start of example(): Second call
end of example(): Second call
```

The problem is that asyncio is not starting the execution of the second call to
`example()` until the first one is finished. Surely this defeats the purpose of
using coroutines in the first place!

Well, this all happens because asyncio does not start the execution of a
coroutine until one is explicitly registered with it (such as with
`asyncio.run()`) or you await it in another coroutine. If we want to start
multiple coroutines and have them run concurrently as above, we can either use
`asyncio.gather()` as in the earlier example, or schedule them individually
with `asyncio.create_task()`:

```python
import asyncio

async def print_after(message, delay):
    """Print a message after the specified delay (in seconds)"""
    await asyncio.sleep(delay)
    print(message)

async def main():
    # Start coroutine twice (hopefully they start!)
    first_awaitable = asyncio.create_task(print_after("world!", 2))
    second_awaitable = asyncio.create_task(print_after("Hello", 1))
    # Wait for coroutines to finish
    await first_awaitable
    await second_awaitable

asyncio.run(main())
```

The adapted snippet above starts running the coroutines immediately and waits
for them to finish, resulting in "Hello" getting printed first as expected:

```
Hello
world!
```

**Note:** `asyncio.create_task()` was introduced in Python 3.7. In older
versions of Python, use `asyncio.ensure_future()` instead.

## Running commands in asyncio

The main responsibilities of the job agent we developed were to install the
dependencies of a batch job and then run the job itself. Each of these steps
require running potentially long lasting shell commands, while simultaneously
logging their output and CPU and memory utilisation on the computer with a
service over HTTP.

Using coroutine-based concurrency works really well with this model, as for
most of the time of the program's execution time, it's waiting for other
processes or for network I/O. We therefore decided to implement our agent with
Python coroutines and asyncio's implementation of subprocess.

asyncio provides an interface for running commands that's very similar to
`subprocess` in the Python standard library:

```python
import asyncio

async def echo(string):
    process = await asyncio.create_subprocess_exec("echo", string)
    await process.wait()

asyncio.run(echo("Hello, world!"))
```

Processes are created using `asyncio.create_subprocess_exec()` (which is itself
a coroutine and so needs to be awaited). Some of the methods on the process
object are also coroutines (like `.wait()` in the above example).

## Asynchronous HTTP with aiohttp

Our job agent is also responsible for sending information back to a central
tracking server, for example to determine the health of the job and allow the
central service to take action when a job becomes unhealthy.

Making a network request is another I/O bound operation that fits well with a
coroutine-based concurrency programming model. We used [aiohttp][aiohttp], a
popular HTTP library built on top of asyncio, to send monitoring information
back to our tracking service.

To make an HTTP request with aiohttp:

```python
import aiohttp
import asyncio

async def fetch_and_print(url):
    async with aiohttp.ClientSession() as session:
        response = await session.get(url)
        print(await response.text())

asyncio.run(fetch_and_print("https://python.org/"))
```

The above example uses an `aiohttp.ClientSession` as an _asynchronous context
manager_ with the `async wait` syntax. This works much in the same way as
standard context managers in Python, except that the code that governs entering
and exiting the context is implemented in a coroutine and so can also be
executed asyncronously. In this case, using the session as a context manager
ensures that it is closed when we're done with it.

## Putting it all together

With the tools above, we can now put together a simple version of our job
running agent, using asyncio to have everything running concurrently!

The agent will:

* Send a notification to a tracking server to indicate that it has started
* Periodically send a heartbeat to the tracking server so it knows the job is
  still healthy
* Run the job command
* Send a notification to the tracking server on completion of the job,
  indicating if it was successful or if it failed

I've put the complete example [on GitHub][example], along with a simple backend
you can test it against. See in particular [agent.py][example agent.py] for the
example agent using coroutines to send heartbeats to the tracking server while
running the command.

## Summary

Couroutines are a great way to achieve concurrency in Python programs
performing I/O bound tasks such as running system commands and handling network
requests. I've demonstrated some of the basics of using them and provided a
more complete example application, but I encourage you to go out and try it out
for yourself to see how it works for your needs.

[Faculty]: https://faculty.ai/
[Scala]: https://www.scala-lang.org/
[asyncio]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html
[asyncio-awaitable]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio-task.html#awaitables
[aiohttp]: https://aiohttp.readthedocs.io/
[example]: https://github.com/acroz/asyncio-example
[example agent.py]: https://github.com/acroz/asyncio-example/blob/master/agent.py
